Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station: cerebrospinal fluid,
the blood-brain barrier and intracranial pressure.
I shall take the candidate through it, question by question. Let us begin.
Describe the formation, circulation and absorption of the cerebrospinal fluid.
The cerebrospinal fluid is the clear fluid that surrounds and permeates the central
nervous system, and an understanding of its formation,
circulation and absorption is important,
since disturbances of these underlie hydrocephalus and contribute to raised
intracranial pressure.
The cerebrospinal fluid is formed chiefly by the choroid plexuses,
specialised vascular structures in the ventricles,
which secrete it actively — it is not a simple filtrate but a secretion,
of controlled composition.
It is formed at a rate of around half a millilitre a minute,
or some five hundred millilitres a day,
and the total volume in the system at any time is around a hundred and fifty
millilitres, so it is turned over several times daily.
From the lateral ventricles, it flows through the third and fourth ventricles,
and out into the subarachnoid space surrounding the brain and spinal cord,
circulating around them.
It is absorbed chiefly through the arachnoid villi, or granulations,
projecting into the venous sinuses, through which it passes into the venous blood,
the absorption depending on the pressure gradient; some is absorbed by other routes.
So the cerebrospinal fluid is actively secreted by the choroid plexuses at around
half a millilitre a minute, a total of about a hundred and fifty millilitres turned
over several times daily; it flows from the lateral ventricles through the
ventricular system into the subarachnoid space,
and is absorbed chiefly through the arachnoid villi into the venous sinuses — a
circulation whose obstruction causes hydrocephalus.
Describe the functions and composition of the cerebrospinal fluid.
The cerebrospinal fluid serves several functions for the central nervous system,
and its composition, which differs from that of the plasma in a controlled way,
reflects its secretion and its role, both being worth knowing.
Its functions are: physical protection,
the fluid providing buoyancy that supports the weight of the brain and a cushion
that protects it against mechanical injury;
the maintenance of a stable chemical environment for the neurons,
the fluid's controlled composition buffering the brain against fluctuations in the
plasma; the removal of waste products of brain metabolism;
and a role in the distribution of substances within the central nervous system.
Its composition differs from plasma because it is a secretion, not a filtrate:
it is essentially free of protein and cells;
its glucose is somewhat lower than the plasma;
and the concentrations of several ions differ slightly,
being controlled by the secretory process.
These differences, and the protein and cell content,
are of diagnostic value when the fluid is sampled.
So the cerebrospinal fluid provides buoyancy supporting and cushioning the brain,
maintains a stable chemical environment for the neurons, removes waste,
and distributes substances; and its composition, as a secretion,
is essentially protein- and cell-free with a lower glucose and controlled ion
concentrations — functions and a composition important to the protection of the
brain and to diagnosis.
Describe the blood-brain barrier.
The blood-brain barrier is the specialised barrier between the blood and the brain
tissue that controls the passage of substances into the central nervous system,
protecting the stable environment that the neurons require,
and it has important consequences for the action and delivery of drugs.
The barrier is formed chiefly by the endothelial cells of the cerebral capillaries,
which, unlike those elsewhere, are joined by tight junctions that prevent the
passage of substances between the cells,
and which lack the fenestrations and the vesicular transport of other capillaries;
the astrocyte foot processes and the basement membrane contribute.
The effect is that substances can cross only through the endothelial cells,
not between them, so their passage is selective: lipid-soluble substances,
such as oxygen, carbon dioxide and many anaesthetic and other lipophilic drugs,
cross readily by diffusion; water crosses freely;
but water-soluble substances and ions cross poorly unless there is a specific
transporter, and large molecules and proteins are excluded.
Essential nutrients, such as glucose and amino acids,
are carried by specific transporters. The barrier is deficient at a few specialised
sites, and it is disrupted by injury, inflammation and tumours.
So the blood-brain barrier, formed by the tight-junctioned cerebral capillary
endothelium with the astrocytes, selectively restricts passage into the brain —
admitting lipid-soluble substances and water freely,
excluding water-soluble substances, ions,
large molecules and proteins except by specific transport — protecting the neuronal
environment, with major consequences for drug delivery, and disrupted by disease.
Describe the Monro-Kellie doctrine and the intracranial pressure-volume
relationship.
The Monro-Kellie doctrine is the fundamental principle governing the intracranial
pressure, and the pressure-volume relationship that follows from it is central to
understanding and managing raised intracranial pressure,
so it is worth setting out carefully.
The doctrine states that the skull is a rigid box of fixed volume,
containing three components — the brain tissue, the blood,
and the cerebrospinal fluid — which are essentially incompressible;
so the total volume within the skull is fixed,
and therefore an increase in the volume of any one component,
or the addition of a fourth, such as a tumour or haematoma,
must be accompanied by a decrease in another,
or the intracranial pressure will rise.
The relationship between the added volume and the resulting pressure is not linear,
but is described by the intracranial pressure-volume curve:
plotting intracranial pressure against intracranial volume,
the curve is flat at first, then rises steeply.
The flat part represents the phase of compensation: as volume is added,
it is initially accommodated by the displacement of cerebrospinal fluid into the
spinal space and of venous blood, so the pressure rises little.
But once these compensatory reserves are exhausted, the curve turns sharply upward,
and further small increases in volume cause large rises in pressure — the phase of
decompensation.
So the Monro-Kellie doctrine holds that the rigid skull contains a fixed volume of
brain, blood and cerebrospinal fluid,
so that an added volume must displace another component or raise the pressure;
and the pressure-volume curve is flat while cerebrospinal fluid and venous blood
are displaced in compensation, then rises steeply once this reserve is exhausted —
the basis of the behaviour of raised intracranial pressure.
Describe the causes and consequences of raised intracranial pressure.
Raised intracranial pressure is a dangerous condition that follows from the
Monro-Kellie doctrine, and its causes and consequences must be understood,
since its recognition and management are central to neuro-anaesthesia and critical
care.
The causes are, by the doctrine, an increase in one of the intracranial components
or the addition of a mass: an increase in brain volume, as in cerebral oedema;
an increase in blood volume, as from venous congestion,
hypercapnia or vasodilatation; an increase in cerebrospinal fluid,
as in hydrocephalus from obstructed flow or absorption; or a mass lesion,
such as a tumour, haematoma or abscess.
The consequences are twofold and dangerous.
First, the raised pressure reduces the cerebral perfusion pressure — since this is
the arterial pressure minus the intracranial pressure — so a rising intracranial
pressure reduces the cerebral blood flow, threatening ischaemia.
Second, the pressure differences within the skull cause the brain to be displaced
and herniated from one compartment to another — through the tentorium or the
foramen magnum — compressing vital structures, including the brainstem,
which is rapidly fatal.
A late reflex, the Cushing response — hypertension and bradycardia — indicates
critically raised pressure.
So raised intracranial pressure results from an increase in brain,
blood or cerebrospinal fluid volume or from a mass lesion;
and its consequences are a reduced cerebral perfusion pressure with ischaemia,
and the herniation of the brain compressing the brainstem, which is fatal,
heralded by the Cushing response — a dangerous condition central to neuro-critical
care.
Describe the types and mechanisms of cerebral oedema.
Cerebral oedema — an increase in the water content of the brain — is an important
cause of raised intracranial pressure,
and it is classified into types by its mechanism,
a classification useful because the types arise differently and respond to
different treatments.
The principal types are three.
Vasogenic oedema is due to a breakdown of the blood-brain barrier,
allowing fluid and protein to leak from the blood into the brain's extracellular
space; it occurs around tumours, abscesses, haemorrhage and contusions,
and in inflammation, and characteristically affects the white matter;
it may respond to corticosteroids when due to tumours.
Cytotoxic oedema is due to the swelling of the cells themselves — neurons and glia
— from a failure of the energy-dependent pumps that maintain the cell volume,
as in ischaemia and hypoxia, so that the cells take up water and swell;
the barrier is initially intact, and it does not respond to steroids.
Interstitial oedema is due to the movement of cerebrospinal fluid into the brain
tissue across the ventricular wall,
as in hydrocephalus with a raised ventricular pressure.
So cerebral oedema is classified as vasogenic — from blood-brain barrier breakdown,
around tumours and lesions, affecting white matter, steroid-responsive in tumours;
cytotoxic — from cellular swelling due to energy failure in ischaemia and hypoxia,
not steroid-responsive; and interstitial — from cerebrospinal fluid movement into
the tissue in hydrocephalus; a classification by mechanism guiding the
understanding and treatment of this cause of raised intracranial pressure.
Describe the principles of managing raised intracranial pressure.
The management of raised intracranial pressure follows logically from the
Monro-Kellie doctrine and the determinants of the cerebral perfusion,
aiming both to reduce the intracranial pressure and to maintain the cerebral
perfusion, and an outline of the principles is useful.
The aims are to reduce the raised intracranial pressure and to preserve an adequate
cerebral perfusion pressure and oxygenation, while treating the cause.
The measures reduce the volume of the intracranial components.
The cerebral blood volume is reduced by ensuring adequate venous drainage — head-up
positioning, avoiding obstruction to the neck veins — and by controlling the
arterial carbon dioxide, since a modest reduction by ventilation constricts the
cerebral vessels and reduces the blood volume,
though excessive hypocapnia risks ischaemia.
The cerebrospinal fluid volume can be reduced by drainage.
The brain water is reduced by osmotic agents — mannitol or hypertonic saline —
which draw water from the brain, and, for vasogenic oedema from tumours,
by corticosteroids. A mass lesion is removed surgically.
Throughout, the cerebral perfusion pressure is maintained by supporting the
arterial pressure, and factors that raise the pressure or the metabolic rate — such
as hypoxia, hypercapnia, seizures and fever — are avoided or treated;
anaesthetic agents that reduce the cerebral metabolic rate and blood volume are
used.
So raised intracranial pressure is managed by reducing the cerebral blood volume
through venous drainage and controlled ventilation, draining cerebrospinal fluid,
reducing brain water with osmotic agents and, for tumour oedema, steroids,
and removing mass lesions surgically;
while maintaining the cerebral perfusion pressure and avoiding factors that raise
the pressure or metabolism — principles following directly from the Monro-Kellie
doctrine and the determinants of cerebral perfusion.
Pull it together: how do the cerebrospinal fluid,
the blood-brain barrier and the rigid skull combine to determine the intracranial
environment?
I would draw it together around the brain as an organ enclosed in a rigid box and
bathed in a controlled fluid behind a selective barrier,
these features together determining its environment and its vulnerability.
The rigid skull, by the Monro-Kellie doctrine, fixes the total intracranial volume,
so that the brain, blood and cerebrospinal fluid must remain in balance;
this gives the pressure-volume relationship,
flat while cerebrospinal fluid and venous blood can be displaced in compensation,
then steep once that reserve is exhausted — so that a mass or swelling eventually
raises the intracranial pressure steeply,
reducing the cerebral perfusion and herniating the brain.
The cerebrospinal fluid, secreted and absorbed in balance,
provides buoyancy and a stable environment and serves as the compensatory reserve;
its obstruction causes hydrocephalus.
The blood-brain barrier protects the stable chemical environment of the neurons by
selectively controlling what enters;
its breakdown causes vasogenic oedema and raised pressure.
So the management of the intracranial environment rests on these features.
So the rigid skull fixes the intracranial volume,
giving the pressure-volume relationship and the dangers of raised pressure;
the cerebrospinal fluid provides buoyancy,
a stable environment and the compensatory reserve;
and the blood-brain barrier protects the neuronal environment — these three
features combining to determine the intracranial environment, its compensation,
and its vulnerability to raised pressure, the framework of neuro-critical care.
Describe the types of hydrocephalus.
Hydrocephalus — an excess of cerebrospinal fluid within the skull,
usually with enlargement of the ventricles — results from a disturbance of the
balance between the formation and the absorption or circulation of the fluid,
and it is classified in ways that follow from this, of clinical importance.
Since the cerebrospinal fluid is continually formed and absorbed,
hydrocephalus arises when its circulation or absorption is impeded, or, rarely,
its production excessive.
The principal distinction is between obstructive, or non-communicating,
hydrocephalus, in which the flow of cerebrospinal fluid through the ventricular
system is obstructed — for instance by a tumour or congenital narrowing blocking
the passages between the ventricles — so that fluid accumulates upstream of the
block; and communicating hydrocephalus,
in which the flow through the ventricles is not obstructed,
but the absorption of the fluid through the arachnoid villi is impaired — for
instance after meningitis or subarachnoid haemorrhage — so that fluid accumulates
throughout the system.
A particular form is normal-pressure hydrocephalus,
a chronic communicating hydrocephalus in the elderly,
with ventricular enlargement but a normal or only intermittently raised pressure,
presenting with a characteristic triad of gait disturbance,
cognitive impairment and incontinence.
Hydrocephalus is treated by diverting the fluid, as by a shunt.
So hydrocephalus is classified as obstructive,
or non-communicating — from a block within the ventricular system;
and communicating — from impaired absorption through the arachnoid villi;
with normal-pressure hydrocephalus a chronic communicating form in the elderly with
a characteristic triad; treated by shunting — a classification following from the
formation, circulation and absorption of the fluid.
Describe the methods and waveform of intracranial pressure monitoring.
The direct monitoring of the intracranial pressure is important in the management
of patients with, or at risk of, raised intracranial pressure,
and an understanding of its methods and of the pressure waveform is useful.
The intracranial pressure is monitored by placing a sensor within the skull.
The principal methods are an external ventricular drain — a catheter placed into a
lateral ventricle, which both measures the pressure, by connection to a transducer,
and allows the therapeutic drainage of cerebrospinal fluid,
and is regarded as the reference method;
and intraparenchymal monitors — a probe with a sensor at its tip placed into the
brain tissue.
The normal intracranial pressure is low,
around five to fifteen millimetres of mercury in the adult.
The intracranial pressure trace shows pulsations with the cardiac and respiratory
cycles, and a characteristic waveform whose morphology changes as the compliance
falls.
Slower, pathological waves are described,
the most important being the Lundberg A waves, or plateau waves — sustained,
marked rises in pressure lasting minutes,
which indicate a dangerously reduced compliance and exhausted compensatory reserve.
So the intracranial pressure is monitored by an external ventricular drain — the
reference method, also allowing cerebrospinal fluid drainage — or an
intraparenchymal probe; the normal pressure being around five to fifteen
millimetres of mercury, with a waveform that changes as compliance falls,
and pathological Lundberg A, or plateau,
waves indicating dangerously exhausted compensatory reserve — methods and signs
central to neuro-critical care.
Describe the herniation syndromes.
When the intracranial pressure rises unevenly, or a mass develops,
the brain may be displaced and herniated from one intracranial compartment to
another, and these herniation syndromes are the dangerous, often fatal,
consequence of raised intracranial pressure, so their patterns are worth knowing.
The skull is divided into compartments by folds of dura — the tentorium separating
the cerebral hemispheres above from the cerebellum and brainstem below,
and the falx between the hemispheres — and by the foramen magnum at the base.
A pressure gradient drives the brain from a higher- to a lower-pressure compartment.
The principal syndromes are: subfalcine herniation,
where the cingulate gyrus is pushed under the falx to the other side; uncal,
or lateral tentorial, herniation, where the medial temporal lobe is forced down
through the tentorial opening, compressing the third cranial nerve — causing a
dilated pupil — and the midbrain; central transtentorial herniation,
where the diencephalon and midbrain are forced down through the tentorium; and,
most dangerous, tonsillar herniation,
where the cerebellar tonsils are forced down through the foramen magnum,
compressing the medulla and its vital centres — coning — which is rapidly fatal.
So raised intracranial pressure can herniate the brain between compartments:
subfalcine, under the falx; uncal, through the tentorium,
compressing the third nerve and midbrain; central transtentorial; and tonsillar,
through the foramen magnum, compressing the medulla — coning,
which is rapidly fatal; the dangerous consequences of raised intracranial pressure,
their patterns indicating the site and threatening the brainstem.
Describe the regulation of cerebral perfusion in the patient with traumatic brain
injury.
The management of the cerebral perfusion in traumatic brain injury is guided by the
physiology of cerebral blood flow and intracranial pressure,
modified by the disturbances that injury causes,
and an outline of the principles is useful.
After a traumatic brain injury, the normal regulation is often disturbed:
autoregulation may be impaired or abolished,
so that the cerebral blood flow becomes pressure-dependent,
varying directly with the perfusion pressure — so that hypotension causes
ischaemia, and hypertension may worsen oedema and raise the intracranial pressure.
The intracranial pressure is often raised by oedema, haematoma and congestion.
The aims of management are therefore to maintain an adequate cerebral perfusion
pressure, while controlling the intracranial pressure and avoiding secondary
insults.
The cerebral perfusion pressure is maintained within a target range — typically
above around sixty millimetres of mercury — by controlling the intracranial
pressure and supporting the arterial pressure, avoiding both too low a pressure,
which causes ischaemia, and too high, which worsens oedema and pressure.
The intracranial pressure is monitored and managed by the measures already
described. The avoidance of the secondary insults — hypoxia, hypotension,
hypercapnia, hyperthermia, hypoglycaemia and seizures — which worsen the injury,
is crucial.
So in traumatic brain injury, autoregulation is often impaired,
making cerebral blood flow pressure-dependent,
while the intracranial pressure is raised;
so management aims to maintain an adequate cerebral perfusion pressure — around
sixty millimetres of mercury or above — by controlling the intracranial pressure
and supporting the arterial pressure,
while monitoring the pressure and rigorously avoiding the secondary insults that
worsen injury — principles applying the physiology of cerebral perfusion to the
injured brain.
Describe the circumventricular organs.
Although the blood-brain barrier protects most of the brain,
there are a few specialised regions where it is deficient — the circumventricular
organs — and these are functionally important,
allowing the brain to sense the blood and to secrete into it,
so they are worth knowing as exceptions to the barrier.
The circumventricular organs are small regions,
situated around the margins of the ventricles,
where the capillaries are fenestrated and the blood-brain barrier is absent or
deficient, so that the neurons there are exposed to the contents of the blood.
This deficiency serves two kinds of function.
Some of these organs are sensory, allowing the brain to monitor the composition of
the blood — substances that cannot normally cross the barrier: for example,
the area postrema in the medulla acts as a chemoreceptor trigger zone,
detecting circulating emetic substances and toxins and triggering vomiting — which
is why it is a site of action of emetic and anti-emetic drugs;
and other organs sense the osmolality and circulating hormones,
contributing to the regulation of fluid balance and other functions.
Others are secretory, releasing hormones into the blood,
as the neurohypophysis releases antidiuretic hormone and oxytocin.
So the circumventricular organs are small regions around the ventricles where the
blood-brain barrier is deficient and the capillaries fenestrated,
allowing the brain to sense the blood — as the area postrema senses emetic
substances to trigger vomiting, and others sense osmolality and hormones — and to
secrete hormones into it, as the neurohypophysis does;
functionally important exceptions to the blood-brain barrier,
and sites of drug action.
Describe the concepts of intracranial compliance and elastance.
The behaviour of the intracranial pressure in response to changes in volume is
described by the related concepts of compliance and elastance,
an understanding of which clarifies the pressure-volume relationship and its
clinical use.
Compliance is the change in volume per unit change in pressure — how much the
volume can change for a given pressure change; elastance is its reciprocal,
the change in pressure per unit change in volume — how much the pressure rises for
a given added volume.
The intracranial pressure-volume curve, flat then steep,
can be re-expressed in these terms.
On the flat part of the curve, the compliance is high — a large volume can be added
with little rise in pressure — because the compensatory reserves of displaceable
cerebrospinal fluid and venous blood are available; equivalently,
the elastance is low.
As volume is added and these reserves are used up, the curve steepens:
the compliance falls and the elastance rises,
so that the same added volume now causes a much larger rise in pressure.
So a patient on the steep part of the curve has a low compliance and a high
elastance, and is at risk of a large rise in pressure from any further small
increase in volume — such as a rise in cerebral blood volume from hypercapnia or
coughing.
So intracranial compliance is the volume change per unit pressure change,
and elastance its reciprocal; on the flat part of the pressure-volume curve the
compliance is high and elastance low,
while as the compensatory reserve is exhausted the curve steepens,
the compliance falling and the elastance rising — so a patient with low compliance
is at risk of large pressure rises from small added volumes;
concepts clarifying the pressure-volume relationship.
Describe the glymphatic system.
The glymphatic system is a recently-described pathway for the clearance of waste
from the brain, which has attracted much interest,
and although its details are still being established,
an outline is worth giving as a modern concept of cerebral fluid handling.
The brain lacks conventional lymphatic vessels within its substance,
yet it must clear the waste products of its metabolism.
The glymphatic system is proposed as a brain-wide pathway that performs this
clearance using the cerebrospinal and interstitial fluids.
In this model, cerebrospinal fluid enters the brain tissue along the spaces
surrounding the arteries, driven in part by arterial pulsation;
it then flows through the brain's interstitial space,
where it mixes with the interstitial fluid and collects the waste products,
including metabolites and proteins;
and it leaves along the spaces surrounding the veins,
carrying the waste away to be cleared.
The astrocytes, through their water channels,
are thought to facilitate this flow — hence the name, combining glia and lymphatic.
The system is reported to be more active during sleep,
which has been suggested as one function of sleep — the clearance of the waste
accumulated during waking, including proteins implicated in neurodegenerative
disease.
So the glymphatic system is a proposed brain-wide waste-clearance pathway,
in which cerebrospinal fluid enters along the periarterial spaces,
flows through the interstitium collecting waste,
facilitated by the astrocytic water channels,
and leaves along the perivenous spaces; reportedly more active in sleep,
with possible relevance to neurodegeneration — a modern,
still-developing concept of cerebral fluid handling and waste clearance.
Describe idiopathic intracranial hypertension.
Idiopathic intracranial hypertension is a condition of raised intracranial pressure
occurring without a mass lesion, hydrocephalus or other identifiable structural
cause, and it is instructive as a disturbance of the cerebrospinal fluid dynamics,
and of some relevance to anaesthesia.
In this condition, the intracranial pressure is chronically raised,
but there is no tumour, no obstruction of the ventricles,
and the ventricles are not enlarged — indeed they may be small;
the brain substance and the cerebrospinal fluid composition are normal.
The cause is not fully understood, but it is thought to involve a disturbance of
the cerebrospinal fluid dynamics, perhaps an impairment of its absorption,
possibly related to a raised cerebral venous pressure;
it occurs characteristically in young, often overweight, women,
and is associated with certain drugs and conditions.
The raised pressure causes headache, and, importantly,
papilloedema — swelling of the optic discs — which threatens vision,
the principal danger.
It is managed by measures to reduce the cerebrospinal fluid — weight loss,
drugs such as acetazolamide that reduce its production, and,
if vision is threatened, drainage procedures or optic nerve sheath fenestration.
So idiopathic intracranial hypertension is a chronically raised intracranial
pressure without a mass, obstruction or enlarged ventricles,
thought to arise from disturbed cerebrospinal fluid absorption,
occurring characteristically in young overweight women;
causing headache and sight-threatening papilloedema, and managed by weight loss,
acetazolamide and, if needed, drainage — an instructive disturbance of
cerebrospinal fluid dynamics.
Describe the effects of anaesthesia and positioning on the intracranial pressure.
Many of the routine aspects of anaesthesia and patient positioning affect the
intracranial pressure, and an awareness of these is essential when anaesthetising
the patient with reduced intracranial compliance,
since seemingly minor actions can cause dangerous rises.
Several factors raise the intracranial pressure,
chiefly by increasing the cerebral blood volume or impeding venous drainage.
Hypercapnia, from hypoventilation, dilates the cerebral vessels and raises the
cerebral blood volume and pressure; hypoxia does likewise.
The volatile anaesthetic agents, by their direct cerebral vasodilatation,
tend to raise the cerebral blood volume and intracranial pressure,
particularly at higher concentrations.
Coughing, straining and the response to laryngoscopy raise the intracranial
pressure by raising the arterial and venous pressures.
Positioning is important: the head-down position,
and any obstruction to the neck veins — by rotation or flexion of the head,
or a tight tube tie — impede the cerebral venous drainage and raise the pressure,
while the head-up position aids drainage and lowers it.
Positive end-expiratory pressure and a raised intrathoracic pressure impede venous
drainage. Conversely, the intravenous agents,
hyperventilation and head-up positioning lower the pressure.
So anaesthesia and positioning affect the intracranial pressure: hypercapnia,
hypoxia, the volatile agents, coughing and straining raise it,
as do the head-down position and obstruction to venous drainage;
while the intravenous agents, controlled ventilation and head-up positioning lower
it — an awareness essential in the patient with reduced compliance,
in whom minor actions can cause dangerous rises.
Describe the cerebrospinal fluid examination and its diagnostic value.
The examination of the cerebrospinal fluid, obtained usually by lumbar puncture,
is a valuable diagnostic investigation,
and its principles and the meaning of its findings follow from the formation and
composition of the fluid, so they are worth knowing.
The fluid is sampled, most commonly,
by lumbar puncture — introducing a needle into the subarachnoid space in the lumbar
region, below the end of the spinal cord. This allows the measurement of the
pressure, and the analysis of the fluid. Several features are examined.
The appearance: normally clear and colourless,
it becomes cloudy with a high cell count, as in meningitis,
or blood-stained or xanthochromic with haemorrhage.
The cells: a raised white cell count indicates inflammation or infection,
the type of cell suggesting the cause.
The protein: normally low, it is raised in many conditions.
The glucose: normally somewhat below the blood level,
it is reduced in bacterial and some other infections, as the organisms consume it.
Microbiological and other specific tests are performed as indicated.
Importantly, lumbar puncture is hazardous, and contraindicated,
when the intracranial pressure is raised by a mass lesion,
because the withdrawal of fluid can precipitate herniation,
so imaging precedes it where this is suspected.
So the cerebrospinal fluid, sampled by lumbar puncture,
is examined for its pressure, appearance, cells, protein and glucose,
and by specific tests — findings reflecting its formation and composition that
diagnose meningitis, haemorrhage and other conditions;
but lumbar puncture is hazardous when the pressure is raised by a mass,
risking herniation — a valuable but carefully-applied investigation.
Describe the management options for acutely raised intracranial pressure,
in order of escalation.
In the patient with acutely and dangerously raised intracranial pressure,
the management is applied in a logical, escalating sequence,
from simple measures to more aggressive ones,
and setting this out draws together the principles of intracranial pressure control.
The general measures come first and underlie all the rest:
ensuring adequate oxygenation and ventilation, avoiding hypercapnia and hypoxia;
positioning the patient head-up with the neck free to aid venous drainage;
maintaining an adequate arterial pressure and so cerebral perfusion pressure;
controlling temperature, treating fever; treating seizures;
and providing sedation and analgesia to reduce the metabolic rate and prevent
surges.
If the pressure remains raised, specific measures are escalated:
the drainage of cerebrospinal fluid through a ventricular drain,
which directly removes volume; the administration of osmotic agents,
mannitol or hypertonic saline, to draw water from the brain; and a controlled,
moderate reduction of the arterial carbon dioxide by ventilation,
to reduce the cerebral blood volume, avoiding excessive hypocapnia.
For refractory raised pressure, further measures include deeper sedation,
sometimes to the point of suppressing cerebral metabolism with agents such as
barbiturates; and, as a last resort, decompressive craniectomy,
surgically removing part of the skull to allow the brain to expand.
Throughout, the cause is treated, and a mass lesion removed.
So acutely raised intracranial pressure is managed in escalating steps:
general measures — oxygenation, head-up positioning, perfusion pressure,
temperature, seizures, sedation — then cerebrospinal fluid drainage,
osmotic agents and controlled mild hyperventilation, and, if refractory,
metabolic suppression and decompressive craniectomy;
with the cause treated throughout — a logical escalation drawing together the
principles of intracranial pressure control.
Describe decompressive craniectomy.
Decompressive craniectomy is a surgical measure for the management of severely
raised and refractory intracranial pressure,
and its rationale follows directly from the Monro-Kellie doctrine,
so it is worth describing as the ultimate means of relieving raised pressure.
The rationale is that the dangers of raised intracranial pressure arise because the
brain is enclosed in the rigid, fixed-volume skull,
so that swelling or a mass raises the pressure steeply once the compensatory
reserve is exhausted.
Decompressive craniectomy addresses this directly by removing a large portion of
the skull — and opening the dura — so that the enclosed space is no longer of fixed
volume: the swollen brain can expand outward through the defect,
relieving the pressure and restoring the cerebral perfusion.
It is used as a last-resort measure for refractory raised intracranial pressure,
most often after traumatic brain injury or large ischaemic stroke with swelling,
when other measures have failed.
It can effectively lower the intracranial pressure and may be life-saving,
but it is a major intervention, and although it reduces the pressure and mortality,
the effect on the quality of survival is debated,
since some survivors are left severely disabled.
The skull defect is later repaired.
So decompressive craniectomy removes a large portion of the skull and opens the
dura, so that the enclosed space is no longer of fixed volume and the swollen brain
can expand outward, relieving refractory raised intracranial pressure;
a last-resort, life-saving measure after trauma or large stroke,
effective at lowering the pressure though its effect on the quality of survival is
debated — the ultimate application of the Monro-Kellie principle.
Describe the states of low cerebrospinal fluid pressure,
including post-dural-puncture headache.
Just as a raised intracranial pressure causes harm,
so too can an abnormally low cerebrospinal fluid pressure,
and the post-dural-puncture headache is the example most relevant to anaesthesia,
so it is worth describing as the counterpart to raised pressure.
A low cerebrospinal fluid pressure arises most commonly from a leak of the fluid,
which reduces its volume and pressure.
The anaesthetically important cause is a dural puncture — deliberate,
as in spinal anaesthesia or lumbar puncture, or accidental,
as a complication of epidural insertion — which leaves a hole in the dura through
which cerebrospinal fluid can leak into the epidural space;
if the leak exceeds the production, the fluid volume and pressure fall.
The characteristic consequence is the post-dural-puncture headache:
a headache that is characteristically postural,
being relieved by lying flat and worsened by sitting or standing,
because in the upright position the reduced fluid fails to support the brain,
which sags and puts traction on the pain-sensitive structures;
the low pressure also causes a compensatory cerebral vasodilatation.
It is more likely with a larger needle. It usually resolves as the leak heals and
the fluid is replenished, aided by conservative measures, and,
if severe and persistent, treated by an epidural blood patch, which seals the leak.
So a low cerebrospinal fluid pressure, usually from a leak,
causes — after dural puncture — the post-dural-puncture headache:
a postural headache, relieved by lying flat,
from the failure of the reduced fluid to support the brain,
with compensatory vasodilatation; usually self-limiting but treated, if severe,
by an epidural blood patch — the anaesthetically important counterpart to raised
intracranial pressure.
Thank you. An excellent and complete account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, CSF is actively secreted by the choroid plexuses (~0.5 mL/min, ~500 mL/day;
total ~150 mL, turned over several times daily),
flows from the lateral ventricles through the ventricular system into the
subarachnoid space, and is absorbed chiefly through the arachnoid villi into the
venous sinuses (obstruction → hydrocephalus).
It provides buoyancy/cushioning, a stable neuronal environment, and waste removal;
as a secretion it is protein/cell-free with lower glucose and controlled ions.
Second, The blood-brain barrier (tight-junctioned cerebral capillary endothelium +
astrocytes) selectively restricts entry: lipid-soluble substances (O2, CO2,
lipophilic drugs) and water cross freely; water-soluble substances, ions,
large molecules and proteins are excluded except by specific transport — protecting
the neuronal environment, with major consequences for drug delivery;
disrupted by injury, inflammation and tumours.
Third, Monro-Kellie doctrine: the rigid skull holds a fixed volume of brain + blood
+ CSF, so an added volume (tumour, haematoma) must displace another component or
raise ICP.
The pressure-volume curve is flat during compensation (CSF + venous blood
displaced), then rises steeply once reserve is exhausted (decompensation). 4.
Raised ICP results from increased brain (oedema), blood (venous congestion,
hypercapnia), or CSF (hydrocephalus) volume, or a mass lesion.
Consequences: reduced cerebral perfusion pressure (CPP = MAP − ICP) with ischaemia;
and herniation compressing the brainstem (fatal),
heralded by the Cushing response (hypertension + bradycardia).
Fourth, Cerebral oedema: vasogenic (barrier breakdown, around tumours/lesions,
white matter, steroid-responsive in tumours);
cytotoxic (cell swelling from energy failure in ischaemia/hypoxia,
not steroid-responsive); interstitial (CSF into tissue in hydrocephalus).
Managed by reducing cerebral blood volume (head-up, controlled ventilation/CO2),
draining CSF, osmotic agents (mannitol/hypertonic saline) ± steroids for tumour
oedema, removing mass lesions — while maintaining CPP and avoiding
hypoxia/hypercapnia/seizures/fever.
Thank you. That concludes the station.